1. J Clin Med. 2023 Sep 25;12(19):6190. doi: 10.3390/jcm12196190.

Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS) in Mild Cognitive 
Impairment: Effects on Cognitive Functions-A Systematic Review.

Sharbafshaaer M(1), Gigi I(1), Lavorgna L(2), Esposito S(2), Bonavita S(1)(2), 
Tedeschi G(1)(2), Esposito F(1), Trojsi F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)MRI Research Center, Department of Advanced Medical and Surgical Sciences, 
Università degli Studi della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", 80138 Naples, Italy.
(2)First Division of Neurology, Università degli Studi della Campania "Luigi 
Vanvitelli", 80138 Naples, Italy.

Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) is a non-invasive brain 
stimulation technique also used as a non-pharmacological intervention against 
cognitive impairment. The purpose of the present review was to summarize what is 
currently known about the effectiveness of rTMS intervention on different 
cognitive domains in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and to 
address potential neuromodulation approaches in combination with 
electroencephalography (EEG) and neuroimaging, especially functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI). In this systematic review, we consulted three main 
databases (PubMed, Science Direct, and Scopus), and Google Scholar was selected 
for the gray literature search. The PRISMA flowchart drove the studies' 
inclusion. The selection process ensured that only high-quality studies were 
included; after removing duplicate papers, explicit ratings were given based on 
the quality classification as high (A), moderate (B), or low (C), considering 
factors such as risks of bias, inaccuracies, inconsistencies, lack of direction, 
and publication bias. Seven full-text articles fulfilled the stated inclusion, 
reporting five double-blind, randomized, sham-controlled studies, a case study, 
and a randomized crossover trial. The results of the reviewed studies suggested 
that rTMS in MCI patients is safe and effective for enhancing cognitive 
functions, thus making it a potential therapeutic approach for MCI patients. 
Changes in functional connectivity within the default mode network (DMN) after 
targeted rTMS could represent a valuable indicator of treatment response. 
Finally, high-frequency rTMS over the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) has 
been shown to significantly enhance cognitive functions, such as executive 
performance, together with the increase of functional connectivity within 
frontoparietal networks. The main limitations were the number of included 
studies and the exclusion of studies using intermittent theta-burst stimulation, 
used in studies on Alzheimer's disease. Therefore, neuroimaging techniques in 
combination with rTMS have been shown to be useful for future network-based, 
fMRI-guided therapeutic approaches.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12196190
PMID: 37834834


2. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Oct 9;24(19):15023. doi: 10.3390/ijms241915023.

Aggregation, Transmission, and Toxicity of the Microtubule-Associated Protein 
Tau: A Complex Comprehension.

Hu J(1), Sha W(1), Yuan S(1), Wu J(1)(2), Huang Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Systems Health Science of Zhejiang Province, School of Life 
Science, Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Hangzhou 310024, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Systems Biology, Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, 
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou 
310024, China.

The microtubule-associated protein tau is an intrinsically disordered protein 
containing a few short and transient secondary structures. Tau physiologically 
associates with microtubules (MTs) for its stabilization and detaches from MTs 
to regulate its dynamics. Under pathological conditions, tau is abnormally 
modified, detaches from MTs, and forms protein aggregates in neuronal and glial 
cells. Tau protein aggregates can be found in a number of devastating 
neurodegenerative diseases known as "tauopathies", such as Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), frontotemporal dementia (FTD), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), etc. 
However, it is still unclear how the tau protein is compacted into ordered 
protein aggregates, and the toxicity of the aggregates is still debated. 
Fortunately, there has been considerable progress in the study of tau in recent 
years, particularly in the understanding of the intercellular transmission of 
pathological tau species, the structure of tau aggregates, and the 
conformational change events in the tau polymerization process. In this review, 
we summarize the concepts of tau protein aggregation and discuss the views on 
tau protein transmission and toxicity.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241915023
PMID: 37834471


3. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Oct 6;24(19):14959. doi: 10.3390/ijms241914959.

Consequences of Disturbing Manganese Homeostasis.

Baj J(1), Flieger W(1), Barbachowska A(2), Kowalska B(3), Flieger M(4), Forma 
A(1), Teresiński G(4), Portincasa P(5), Buszewicz G(4), Radzikowska-Büchner 
E(6), Flieger J(7).

Author information:
(1)Chair and Department of Anatomy, Medical University of Lublin, 20-090 Lublin, 
Poland.
(2)Department of Plastic, Reconstructive and Burn Surgery, Medical University of 
Lublin, 21-010 Łęczna, Poland.
(3)Department of Water Supply and Wastewater Disposal, Lublin University of 
Technology, 20-618 Lublin, Poland.
(4)Chair and Department of Forensic Medicine, Medical University of Lublin, 
20-090 Lublin, Poland.
(5)Clinica Medica A. Murri, Department of Biomedical Sciences & Human Oncology, 
Medical School, University of Bari, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(6)Department of Plastic, Reconstructive and Maxillary Surgery, CSK MSWiA, 
02-507 Warszawa, Poland.
(7)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Medical University of Lublin, 20-093 
Lublin, Poland.

Manganese (Mn) is an essential trace element with unique functions in the body; 
it acts as a cofactor for many enzymes involved in energy metabolism, the 
endogenous antioxidant enzyme systems, neurotransmitter production, and the 
regulation of reproductive hormones. However, overexposure to Mn is toxic, 
particularly to the central nervous system (CNS) due to it causing the 
progressive destruction of nerve cells. Exposure to manganese is widespread and 
occurs by inhalation, ingestion, or dermal contact. Associations have been 
observed between Mn accumulation and neurodegenerative diseases such as 
manganism, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. People with genetic diseases associated with a 
mutation in the gene associated with impaired Mn excretion, kidney disease, iron 
deficiency, or a vegetarian diet are at particular risk of excessive exposure to 
Mn. This review has collected data on the current knowledge of the source of Mn 
exposure, the experimental data supporting the dispersive accumulation of Mn in 
the brain, the controversies surrounding the reference values of biomarkers 
related to Mn status in different matrices, and the competitiveness of Mn with 
other metals, such as iron (Fe), magnesium (Mg), zinc (Zn), copper (Cu), lead 
(Pb), calcium (Ca). The disturbed homeostasis of Mn in the body has been 
connected with susceptibility to neurodegenerative diseases, fertility, and 
infectious diseases. The current evidence on the involvement of Mn in metabolic 
diseases, such as type 2 diabetes mellitus/insulin resistance, osteoporosis, 
obesity, atherosclerosis, and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, was collected 
and discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241914959
PMID: 37834407


4. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Oct 5;24(19):14932. doi: 10.3390/ijms241914932.

MRI and Clinical Biomarkers Overlap between Glaucoma and Alzheimer's Disease.

Martucci A(1), Di Giuliano F(2), Minosse S(3), Pocobelli G(1), Nucci C(1), 
Garaci F(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology Unit, Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Rome 
"Tor Vergata", 00133 Rome, Italy.
(2)Neuroradiology Unit, Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of 
Rome "Tor Vergata", 00133 Rome, Italy.
(3)Diagnostic Imaging Unit, Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University 
of Rome "Tor Vergata", 00133 Rome, Italy.
(4)San Raffaele Cassino, 03043 Frosinone, Italy.

Glaucoma is the leading cause of blindness worldwide. It is classically 
associated with structural and functional changes in the optic nerve head and 
retinal nerve fiber layer, but the damage is not limited to the eye. The 
involvement of the central visual pathways and disruption of brain network 
organization have been reported using advanced neuroimaging techniques. The 
brain structural changes at the level of the areas implied in processing visual 
information could justify the discrepancy between signs and symptoms and 
underlie the analogy of this disease with neurodegenerative dementias, such as 
Alzheimer's disease, and with the complex group of pathologies commonly referred 
to as "disconnection syndromes." This review aims to summarize the current state 
of the art on the use of advanced neuroimaging techniques in glaucoma and 
Alzheimer's disease, highlighting the emerging biomarkers shared by both 
diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241914932
PMID: 37834380

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


5. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Oct 5;24(19):14925. doi: 10.3390/ijms241914925.

Impact of Microbiome-Brain Communication on Neuroinflammation and 
Neurodegeneration.

Stolzer I(1), Scherer E(1), Süß P(2), Rothhammer V(3), Winner B(4)(5)(6), 
Neurath MF(1)(6), Günther C(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine 1, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), 91054 Erlangen, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular Neurology, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), 91054 Erlangen, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), 91054 Erlangen, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), 91054 Erlangen, 
Germany.
(5)Center of Rare Diseases Erlangen (ZSEER), Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), 91054 Erlangen, 
Germany.
(6)Deutsches Zentrum Immuntherapie (DZI), Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 91054 
Erlangen, Germany.

The gut microbiome plays a pivotal role in maintaining human health, with 
numerous studies demonstrating that alterations in microbial compositions can 
significantly affect the development and progression of various immune-mediated 
diseases affecting both the digestive tract and the central nervous system 
(CNS). This complex interplay between the microbiota, the gut, and the CNS is 
referred to as the gut-brain axis. The role of the gut microbiota in the 
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases has gained increasing attention in 
recent years, and evidence suggests that gut dysbiosis may contribute to disease 
development and progression. Clinical studies have shown alterations in the 
composition of the gut microbiota in multiple sclerosis patients, with a 
decrease in beneficial bacteria and an increase in pro-inflammatory bacteria. 
Furthermore, changes within the microbial community have been linked to the 
pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease. 
Microbiota-gut-brain communication can impact neurodegenerative diseases through 
various mechanisms, including the regulation of immune function, the production 
of microbial metabolites, as well as modulation of host-derived soluble factors. 
This review describes the current literature on the gut-brain axis and 
highlights novel communication systems that allow cross-talk between the gut 
microbiota and the host that might influence the pathogenesis of 
neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241914925
PMID: 37834373


6. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Oct 4;24(19):14898. doi: 10.3390/ijms241914898.

Assessing Drug Administration Techniques in Zebrafish Models of Neurological 
Disease.

Chaoul V(1), Dib EY(2), Bedran J(1), Khoury C(2), Shmoury O(1), Harb F(2), 
Soueid J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, 
American University of Beirut, Beirut P.O. Box 11-0236, Lebanon.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Medical Sciences, 
University of Balamand, Kalhat P.O. Box 100, Lebanon.

Neurological diseases, including neurodegenerative and neurodevelopmental 
disorders, affect nearly one in six of the world's population. The burden of the 
resulting deaths and disability is set to rise during the next few decades as a 
consequence of an aging population. To address this, zebrafish have become 
increasingly prominent as a model for studying human neurological diseases and 
exploring potential therapies. Zebrafish offer numerous benefits, such as 
genetic homology and brain similarities, complementing traditional mammalian 
models and serving as a valuable tool for genetic screening and drug discovery. 
In this comprehensive review, we highlight various drug delivery techniques and 
systems employed for therapeutic interventions of neurological diseases in 
zebrafish, and evaluate their suitability. We also discuss the challenges 
encountered during this process and present potential advancements in innovative 
techniques.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241914898
PMID: 37834345


7. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Sep 30;24(19):14795. doi: 10.3390/ijms241914795.

Neutrophil-Mediated Progression of Mild Cognitive Impairment to Dementia.

Cho K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, Kyonggi University, Suwon 16227, Republic of 
Korea.

Cognitive impairment is a serious condition that begins with amnesia and 
progresses to cognitive decline, behavioral dysfunction, and neuropsychiatric 
impairment. In the final stage, dysphagia and incontinence occur. There are 
numerous studies and developed drugs for cognitive dysfunction in 
neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD); however, their 
clinical effectiveness remains equivocal. To date, attempts have been made to 
overcome cognitive dysfunction and understand and delay the aging processes that 
lead to degenerative and chronic diseases. Cognitive dysfunction is involved in 
aging and the disruption of inflammation and innate immunity. Recent reports 
have indicated that the innate immune system is prevalent in patients with AD, 
and that peripheral neutrophil markers can predict a decline in executive 
function in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Furthermore, altered 
levels of pro-inflammatory interleukins have been reported in MCI, which have 
been suggested to play a role in the peripheral immune system during the process 
from early MCI to dementia. Neutrophils are the first responders of the innate 
immune system. Neutrophils eliminate harmful cellular debris via phagocytosis, 
secrete inflammatory factors to activate host defense systems, stimulate 
cytokine production, kill pathogens, and regulate extracellular proteases and 
inhibitors. This review investigated and summarized the regulation of neutrophil 
function during cognitive impairment caused by various degenerative diseases. In 
addition, this work elucidates the cellular mechanism of neutrophils in 
cognitive impairment and what is currently known about the effects of activated 
neutrophils on cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241914795
PMID: 37834242


8. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Sep 30;24(19):14794. doi: 10.3390/ijms241914794.

Amyloid Precursor Protein and Alzheimer's Disease.

Orobets KS(1), Karamyshev AL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health 
Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX 79430, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is one of the most common neurodegenerative disorders 
associated with age or inherited mutations. It is characterized by severe 
dementia in the late stages that affect memory, cognitive functions, and daily 
life overall. AD progression is linked to the accumulation of cytotoxic amyloid 
beta (Aβ) and hyperphosphorylated tau protein combined with other pathological 
features such as synaptic loss, defective energy metabolism, imbalances in 
protein, and metal homeostasis. Several treatment options for AD are under 
investigation, including antibody-based therapy and stem cell transplantation. 
Amyloid precursor protein (APP) is a membrane protein considered to play a main 
role in AD pathology. It is known that APP in physiological conditions follows a 
non-amyloidogenic pathway; however, it can proceed to an amyloidogenic scenario, 
which leads to the generation of extracellular deleterious Aβ plaques. Not all 
steps of APP biogenesis are clear so far, and these questions should be 
addressed in future studies. AD is a complex chronic disease with many factors 
that contribute to disease progression.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241914794
PMID: 37834241


9. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Sep 29;24(19):14766. doi: 10.3390/ijms241914766.

Deciphering the Mysterious Relationship between the Cross-Pathogenetic 
Mechanisms of Neurodegenerative and Oncological Diseases.

Aleksandrova Y(1), Neganova M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiologically Active Compounds at Federal Research Center of 
Problems of Chemical Physics and Medicinal Chemistry, Russian Academy of 
Sciences, 142432 Chernogolovka, Russia.
(2)Arbuzov Institute of Organic and Physical Chemistry, FRC Kazan Scientific 
Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, 420088 Kazan, Russia.

The relationship between oncological pathologies and neurodegenerative disorders 
is extremely complex and is a topic of concern among a growing number of 
researchers around the world. In recent years, convincing scientific evidence 
has accumulated that indicates the contribution of a number of etiological 
factors and pathophysiological processes to the pathogenesis of these two 
fundamentally different diseases, thus demonstrating an intriguing relationship 
between oncology and neurodegeneration. In this review, we establish the general 
links between three intersecting aspects of oncological pathologies and 
neurodegenerative disorders, i.e., oxidative stress, epigenetic dysregulation, 
and metabolic dysfunction, examining each process in detail to establish an 
unusual epidemiological relationship. We also focus on reviewing the current 
trends in the research and the clinical application of the most promising 
chemical structures and therapeutic platforms that have a modulating effect on 
the above processes. Thus, our comprehensive analysis of the set of molecular 
determinants that have obvious cross-functional pathways in the pathogenesis of 
oncological and neurodegenerative diseases can help in the creation of advanced 
diagnostic tools and in the development of innovative pharmacological 
strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241914766
PMID: 37834214


10. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Sep 28;24(19):14686. doi: 10.3390/ijms241914686.

Physical Exercise as Disease-Modifying Alternative against Alzheimer's Disease: 
A Gut-Muscle-Brain Partnership.

Cutuli D(1)(2), Decandia D(1)(2), Giacovazzo G(2)(3), Coccurello R(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Rome La Sapienza, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(2)European Center for Brain Research, Santa Lucia Foundation IRCCS, 00143 Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Facoltà di Medicina Veterinaria, Università degli Studi di Teramo (UniTE), 
64100 Teramo, Italy.
(4)Institute for Complex Systems (ISC), National Council of Research (CNR), 
00185 Rome, Italy.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a common cause of dementia characterized by 
neurodegenerative dysregulations, cognitive impairments, and neuropsychiatric 
symptoms. Physical exercise (PE) has emerged as a powerful tool for reducing 
chronic inflammation, improving overall health, and preventing cognitive 
decline. The connection between the immune system, gut microbiota (GM), and 
neuroinflammation highlights the role of the gut-brain axis in maintaining brain 
health and preventing neurodegenerative diseases. Neglected so far, PE has 
beneficial effects on microbial composition and diversity, thus providing the 
potential to alleviate neurological symptoms. There is bidirectional 
communication between the gut and muscle, with GM diversity modulation and 
short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) production affecting muscle metabolism and 
preservation, and muscle activity/exercise in turn inducing significant changes 
in GM composition, functionality, diversity, and SCFA production. This 
gut-muscle and muscle-gut interplay can then modulate cognition. For instance, 
irisin, an exercise-induced myokine, promotes neuroplasticity and cognitive 
function through BDNF signaling. Irisin and muscle-generated BDNF may mediate 
the positive effects of physical activity against some aspects of AD 
pathophysiology through the interaction of exercise with the gut microbial 
ecosystem, neural plasticity, anti-inflammatory signaling pathways, and 
neurogenesis. Understanding gut-muscle-brain interconnections hold promise for 
developing strategies to promote brain health, fight age-associated cognitive 
decline, and improve muscle health and longevity.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241914686
PMID: 37834132